---
title: "Compiling: Fundamental Steps Of Compiling"
date: 2025-02-25 20:00:00 +0800
categories:
  - Compile
tags:
  - Compile
math: true
---

## Elementary Steps Of Compiling

### Front End

#### Preprossessing

#### Lexical Analysis

- Turn the preprocessed source code to the token stream.
- Token: a tuple of a category code and a value.
- Categories: Key words, Identifiers, Constants, Operators, Separators.
- Each key word, operator, separator have its own category code; many identifiers share a same category code, and constants are categorised by type.
- 
#### Syntax Analysis

- This step turns source code to an AST

#### Semantic Analysis

- Collect the identifiers by reading declarations.
- Conduct semantic check.
  - Check double declarations, using of undeclared identifiers.
  - Check type mismatch of operators and operands, or between operands.

#### IR Generation

- There're comman and inportant IRs, TAC (Three Address Code) or AST (Abstract Syntax Tree).

### Back End

#### Optimisation

- Equivalently transform the IR to a more efficient form.

#### RTL Generation

- Generate the Register Transfer Language.

#### Target Code Generation

- Generate the target code.

### Binary Utilities

- Assembling
  - Turn the assembly code to machine code.
- Linking
  - Combine the object files to an executable file.

## Development Of Compilers

### Bootstrapping

- The compilers are written in machine code before 1970s.
- After 1980s, the compilers are written in high-level languages, which is called bootstrapping.

Each compiler have at lease 3 languages related to it: Source Language, Target Language, and Implementation Language.

There's a T-diagram to describe compilers: S for source language programs, T for target language programs, and I for implementation language.

Bootstrapping: Use machine code to write a basic compiler for the source language, then use the basic implemented compiler to implement more advanced compilers for the source language, until the compiler can compile itself.

### Transplanting, a.k.a. Cross-Compiling

Use the compiler works on architecture A to compile the source code to the target code for architecture B.
         
- A typical method to transplant and bootstrap.
         
          +++++++++++++++     +++++++++++++++
          | L'        B |     | L'        B |
+++++++++++++++     +++++++++++++++     +++++
| L         B |  L  | L         B |  B  |
+++++     +++++++++++++++     +++++++++++
    |  L  | L         B |  B  |
    +++++++++++     +++++++++++
              |  A  |
              +++++++ 