---
title: "Database Management System: A Brief View"
date: 2025-02-25 20:00:00 +0800
categories:
  - Database
tags:
  - Database
math: true
---

## What Is Called A Database?

Conventionally, a database is a sealed collection of data, and a DBMS (Database Management System) is a software application that interacts with the user, applications, and the database itself to capture and analyze data.

To some extent a morden database definition is based on Internet.

A typical database is based on relational database management system (RDBMS), which is a collection of schemas, tables, queries, reports, views, and other elements. A database is a collection of data that is organized so that it can be easily accessed, managed and updated.

But due to the increasing varieties of requirements, some other types of databases are also developed, such as NoSQL databases, cloud databases, and graph databases. With the development of the LLM, AI for database is also a hot topic nowadays.

## Typical Abstraction Of Database Structure

- Database Administrators (DBA): Conventionally refers to the ones responsible for the installation, configuration, upgrade, administration, monitoring, maintenance, and security of databases in an organisation. But in some cases, DBA refers to the ones who have access to the database.
- Applications: The DBAs operates the databases by these applications.
- Database Management System (DBMS): The software that interacts with the user, applications, and the database itself to capture and analyze data.
- Schema: A structural definition to the data.
- View or Data: Data presented in some schema.

### Three-Level Architecture

- External: The level that database is presented to the applications.
- Conceptual: The global view or schema of the database.
- Internal: The level that database is presented to the DBMS, or the physical level.

### Two-Level Mapping

There're 2 mappings between the levels, which are E-C mapping and C-I mapping. Respectly refers to the mapping between external and conceptual level, and the mapping between conceptual and internal level.

These mappings are implemented by the DBMS.

### Benefits Of The Leveled Architecture

1. Logical data independence: The ability to change the conceptual schema without changing the external schema.
2. Physical data independence: The ability to change the internal schema without changing the conceptual schema.
3. Transparency of data (especially in distributed database): Users have no need to know where the data is stored.

## Classical Data Models

Commonly, there're 3 classical data models: Hierarchical, Network, and Relational. Besides, tree is for hierarchical, graph is for network, and table is for relational.

A row of a table is academically called a tuple, and engineringly called a record. A column of a table is academically called an attribute, and engineringly called a field.
